C# 7.x: ref struct (#601)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/structs.md

A struct declaration shall not supply a *type_parameter_constraints_clauses* unless it also supplies a *type_parameter_list*.

A struct declaration that supplies a *type_parameter_list* is a generic struct declaration. Additionally, any struct nested inside a generic class declaration or a generic struct declaration is itself a generic struct declaration, since type arguments for the containing type shall be supplied to create a constructed type ([§8.4](types.md#84-constructed-types)).

> A struct declaration that includes a `ref` keyword may not have a *struct_interfaces* part.

Reviewer: Shall not rather than may not, for clarity? One for Rex.

Reviewer: Action from 2023-04-19: let's use shall not or "it is an error to" etc.

The modifiers of a struct declaration have the same meaning as those of a class declaration ([§14.2.2](classes.md#1422-class-modifiers)).

### §ref-modifier-new-clause Ref modifier

The `ref` modifier indicates that the *struct_declaration* declares a type whose instances are allocated on the execution stack.

It is a compile-time error if a ref struct type is used in any of the following contexts:

- As the element type of an array.
- As the declared type of a field of a class or a non-ref struct.
- To implement an interface.
- Being boxed to `System.ValueType` or `System.Object`.
- As a type argument.
- An async method.

> - An iterator.

Reviewer 2: Does "a ref struct type is used" include this case:

```C#
using System;
using System.Threading.Tasks;

class Widget
{
    public static implicit operator Widget(Span<int> s) => null;
}

static class Class1
{
    static async Task M(Task t)
    {
        Widget w = stackalloc int[] { 42 };
        await t;
    }
}
```

.NET SDK 6.0.101 compiles it without errors. The Span\<int\> becomes a local variable in the MoveNext method of the state machine.

__Originally posted by @KalleOlaviNiemitalo in <https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/333#discussion_r775953793>__

Author: Yes.  The implementation is more permissive than required.

Reviewer 2: Ah, so "It is a compile-time error" does not mean "The compiler shall issue an error".

Reviewer: Action from 2023-04-19: we should just keep a note of this in the non-conformance doc (which is not yet merged/decided on). No change required to this PR.

Reviewer 3: See dotnet/docs#35096 to capture this issue.

When an instance of a readonly struct is passed to a method, its `this` is treated like an `in` argument/parameter, which disallows write access to any instance fields (except by constructors).

### §ref-modifier-new-clause Ref modifier

> The `ref` modifier indicates that the *struct_declaration* declares a type whose instances are allocated on the execution stack. The `ref` modifier declares that instances may contain ref-like fields, and must obey the *ref_safe_scope* rules. Instances of the ref struct may not be copied out of the *ref_safe_scope* of any of its ref-like fields. The rules for determining the *safe_scope* of a `ref struct` are described in §ref-like-field-initialization.

Reviewer: This has both ref safe scope and safe scope... Needs slight rework with the recent changes?

It is a compile-time error if a ref struct type is used in any of the following contexts:

- As the element type of an array.
- As the declared type of a field of a class or a non-ref struct.
- To implement an interface.

> - Being boxed to `System.ValueType` or `System.Object`.

Reviewer 3: Should this include `dynamic` as well?

- As a type argument.
- An async method.
- An iterator.

> > *Note*: A `ref struct` may not declare `async` methods nor use a `yield return` or `yield break` statement because the implicit `this` parameter cannot be used in those contexts. *end note*

Reviewer: More "may not" that should be shall not, I think.

Reviewer 3: Pint @RexJaeschke again.

Reviewer: Action from 2023-04-19: As before, @BillWagner to change to anything unambiguous.

When an instance of a readonly struct is passed to a method, its `this` is treated like an `in` argument/parameter, which disallows write access to any instance fields (except by constructors).

### §ref-modifier-new-clause Ref modifier

> The `ref` modifier indicates that the *struct_declaration* declares a type whose instances are allocated on the execution stack. The `ref` modifier declares that instances may contain ref-like fields, and may not be copied out of its safe-scope (§safe-scope-rules). The rules for determining the safe scope of a `ref struct` are described in §safe-scope-rules.

Reviewer 4: "execution stack", "stack memory" (used below) – need to address issued raised by @RexJaeschke in #334.

Reviewer 3: #238 includes the changes that allow `stackalloc` in safe code. The first sentence of that new clause reads:

> A stack allocation initializer is a *local_variable_initializer* (§9.2.8) that allocates a block of memory from the call stack.

Ping @RexJaeschke Where should we add this definition? I'll add it to either this PR or #238

Reviewer 3: Decision to add in #238.  See https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/238/files#r1197026105

> The `ref` modifier indicates that the *struct_declaration* declares a type whose instances are allocated on the execution stack. The `ref` modifier declares that instances may contain ref-like fields, and may not be copied out of its safe-scope (§safe-scope-rules). The rules for determining the safe scope of a `ref struct` are described in §safe-scope-rules.

Reviewer 5: Should "ref struct" be introduced as a term?

It is a compile-time error if a ref struct type is used in any of the following contexts:

- As the element type of an array.
- As the declared type of a field of a class or a non-ref struct.
- Being boxed to `System.ValueType` or `System.Object`:
- As a type argument.
- An async method.
- An iterator.

> > *Note*: A `ref struct` shall not declare `async` methods nor use a `yield return` or `yield break` statement because the implicit `this` parameter cannot be used in those contexts. *end note*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> *Note*: A `ref struct` shall not declare `async` instance methods nor use a `yield return` or `yield break` statement within an instance method, because the implicit `this` parameter cannot be used in those contexts. *end note*
```

(Or something similar - basically, static iterator blocks and static async methods are fine.)

- There is no conversion from a `ref struct` type to the type `object` or the type `System.ValueType`.

> - A `ref struct` type shall not be declared to implement any interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A `ref struct` type shall not be declared to implement any interface.
```

- An instance method declared in `object` or in `System.ValueType` but not overridden in a `ref struct` type shall not be called with a receiver of that `ref struct` type.

> - An instance method of a `ref struct` type shall not be captured by method conversion to a delegate type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An instance method of a `ref struct` type shall not be captured by method group conversion to a delegate type.
```

(Maybe?)

- A ref struct shall not be captured by a lambda expression or a local function.

> These constraints ensure that no variable of `ref struct` type refers to stack memory or variables that are no longer valid.

Reviewer 4: I think this sentence could be parsed (and I think I read it was the wrong one):

> These constraints ensure that no variable of `ref struct` type refers to (stack memory) or (variables that are no longer valid).

or as:

> These constraints ensure that no variable of `ref struct` type refers to (stack memory or variables) that are no longer valid.

Suggest clarify.

Reviewer 3: updated in next commit.

Automatically implemented properties ([§15.7.4](classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)) use hidden backing fields, which are only accessible to the property accessors.

> *Note*: This access restriction means that constructors in structs containing automatically implemented properties often need an explicit constructor initializer where they would not otherwise need one, to satisfy the requirement of all fields being definitely assigned before any function member is invoked or the constructor returns. *end note*

### §ref-like-field-initialization Ref safe scopes

A `ref struct` may contain *ref_like field*s. A *ref_like field* is a *reference_variable* (§ref-span-safety). An instance of a `ref struct` may not be copied outside the *ref_safe_scope* (§ref-span-safety-escape-scopes) of any of its ref-like fields. The *ref_safe_scope* of a ref struct is determined from its initializing expression.

> The default value of ref-like fields is the value of the `default` expression, a null reference. The *ref_safe_scope* of a null reference is *caller_scope*. A `ref struct` initialized to its default value can be copied to the *caller_scope*.

Reviewer 4: “The default value of ref-like fields is the value of the `default` expression, a null reference.” does not read well. Is “…, which is a null reference" the intention? Or is it “The default value of ref-like fields, and the value of the `default` expression, is a null reference.”? Should there be an xref to the default literal/operator? Sorry, only questions not answers!

An instance of a `ref struct` `S` requires an initializing ref expression, `ref e` for any ref like fields. The *ref_safe_scope* of `e` determines the *ref_safe_scope* for `S`.

- If `e` is a local variable, the *ref_safe_scope* of `S` is *block*.
- If `e` is a formal parameter, the *ref_safe_scope* of `S` is *calling_method*. This includes when `e` is the `this` parameter.
- If `e` designates a reference to a field, `e1.F`, the *ref_safe_scope* of `S` is the same as the *ref_safe_scope* of `e1`.
- If `e` designates a reference to a conditional, `ref c ? ref e1 : ref e2`, the *ref_safe_scope* of `S` is the narrowest scope among the *ref_safe_scopes* of `e1` and `e2`.
- If `e` is the result of a method invocation, `e1.M(e2, ...)`, the *ref_safe_scope* of `S` is the narrowest of the *ref_safe_scope*s of all argument expressions, including the receiver.

> For an assignment `e1 = e2`, if the type of `e1` is a `ref struct` type, then the *ref_safe_scope* of `e1` is the *ref_safe_scope* of `e2`.

Reviewer: Not sure how assignment matters here. Would like to hear more in the meeting.

Reviewer 3: Using a modified version of another example:

```csharp
    ReadOnlySpan<char> span1;
    ReadOnlySpan<char> span3;
    if (x is not null)
    {
        ReadOnlySpan<char> span2 = x.AsSpan(); // span2 ref_safe_scope is *method*.
        span1 = span2;     // span1 ref_safe_scope is *method* (same as span2)
        span3 = span1; // span3 ref_safe_scope is method (same as span1)
    }
}
```

Reviewer: Discussion in meeting: a *variable* `v` has a *ref_safe_scope*, and if `v` can be assigned variable references which have different *ref_safe_scopes*, it would be odd for `v`'s *ref_safe_scope* to change.

As per https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-7.2/span-safety.md#language-constraints, the assignment part should be a constraint on what *can* be assigned, but a determination of the *ref_safe_scope* of the LHS.

Reviewer: Also noted from @gafter: this would be safe_to_escape not ref_safe_to_escape in the previous way of explaining things.

Action 2023-04-19: @BillWagner to consider - and ping others where appropriate.

Author: These should be language constraints, as per https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-7.2/span-safety.md#language-constraints, not inference rules.

Reviewer 3: Update per meeting notes.

Automatically implemented properties ([§15.7.4](classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)) use hidden backing fields, which are only accessible to the property accessors.

> *Note*: This access restriction means that constructors in structs containing automatically implemented properties often need an explicit constructor initializer where they would not otherwise need one, to satisfy the requirement of all fields being definitely assigned before any function member is invoked or the constructor returns. *end note*

> ### §safe-scope-rules Safe scope constraint for `ref struct` types

Reviewer 3: Here, as in #742, change from "scope" to "context".

#### safe-scope-rules-general General

> At compile-time, each expression whose type is a ref struct is associated with a scope where that instance is safe, its ***safe-scope***. The safe-scope is a scope, enclosing an expression, to which it is safe for the value to escape to. If that scope is the entire function member, we say that the value is ***safe-to-return*** from the function member.

Reviewer: Not sure what "where that instance is safe" means. Safe to use? Perhaps "where that instance can be used safely"?

> At compile-time, each expression whose type is a ref struct is associated with a scope where that instance is safe, its ***safe-scope***. The safe-scope is a scope, enclosing an expression, to which it is safe for the value to escape to. If that scope is the entire function member, we say that the value is ***safe-to-return*** from the function member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At compile-time, each expression whose type is a ref struct is associated with a scope where that instance is safe, its ***safe-scope***. The safe-scope is a scope, enclosing an expression, which it is safe for the value to escape to. If that scope is the entire function member, we say that the value is ***safe-to-return*** from the function member.
```

(Or remove the "to" after "escape" - but we don't need or want both.)

The safe-scope records which scope a ref struct may be copied into. Given an assignment from an expression `E1` with a safe-scope `S1`, to an expression `E2` with safe-scope `S2`, it is an error if `S2` is a wider scope than `S1`.

> There are three different safe-scope values, the same as the ref-safe-scope values defined for reference variables (§ref-span-safety-escape-scopes): block, function-member, and caller-scope. An expression `e1` of a ref struct type is constrained by its safe-scope as follows:

Reviewer 3: Associate *safe-to-return* with *caller-scope*.

> There are three different safe-scope values, the same as the ref-safe-scope values defined for reference variables (§ref-span-safety-escape-scopes): block, function-member, and calling-method. An expression `e1` of a ref struct type is constrained by its safe-scope as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three different safe-scope values, the same as the ref-safe-scope values defined for reference variables (§ref-span-safety-escape-scopes): block, function-member, and caller-scope. An expression `e1` of a ref struct type is constrained by its safe-scope as follows:
```

(And the same below.)

- For a return statement `return e1`, the safe-scope of `e1` must be calling-method.
- For an assignment `e1 = e2` the safe-scope of `e2` must be at least as wide a scope as the safe-scope of `e1`.

> For a method invocation if there is a `ref` or `out` argument of a `ref struct` type (including the receiver unless the type is `readonly`), with safe-scope `E1`, then no argument (including the receiver) may have a narrower safe-scope than `E1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a method invocation if there is a `ref` or `out` argument of a `ref struct` type (including the receiver unless the type is `readonly`), with safe-scope `S1`, then no argument (including the receiver) may have a narrower safe-scope than `S1`.
```

(Just because we normally use E for the expression, and S for its scope.)

Any expression whose compile-time type is not a ref struct has a safe-scope of calling-method.

A `default` expression, for any type, has safe-scope of calling-method.

#### safe-scope-rules-parameter Parameter safe scope

A formal parameter of a ref struct type, including the `this` parameter of an instance method, has a safe-scope of calling-method.

#### safe-scope-rules-local Local variable safe scope

A local variable of a ref struct type has a safe-scope as follows:

- If the variable is an iteration variable of a `foreach` loop, then the variable's safe-scope is the same as the safe-scope of the `foreach` loop's expression.

> - A local of `ref struct` type uninitialized at the point of declaration has a safe-scope of calling method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A local of `ref struct` type which is uninitialized at the point of declaration has a safe-scope of calling method.
```

> A local variable of a ref struct type has a safe-scope as follows:
> 
> - If the variable is an iteration variable of a `foreach` loop, then the variable's safe-scope is the same as the safe-scope of the `foreach` loop's expression.
> - A local of `ref struct` type which is uninitialized at the point of declaration has a safe-scope of calling method.
> - Otherwise the variable's declaration requires an initializer. The variable's safe-scope is the same as the safe-scope of its initializer.

Reviewer 4: There is a bit of repetition here and unusual phrasing, maybe try:

```suggestion
A local variable of a ref struct type has a safe-scope as follows:

- If the variable is an iteration variable of a `foreach` loop, then the variable's safe-scope is the same as the safe-scope of the `foreach` loop's expression.
- Otherwise if the variable's declaration has an initializer then the variable's safe-scope is the same as the safe-scope of that initializer.

```

Note: I omitted that the final option means the variable is not initialised, if that is desired the final bullet can be:

```
- Otherwise the variable is uninitialized at the point of declaration and has a safe-scope of the calling method.
```

#### safe-scope-rules-field Field safe scope

> A a reference to a field, `e.F` where `F` is a ref struct type, has a safe-scope that is the same as the safe-scope of `e`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reference to a field `e.F`, where the type of `F` is a ref struct type, has a safe-scope that is the same as the safe-scope of `e`.
```

#### safe-scope-rules-operator Operators

The application of a user-defined operator is treated as a method invocation (§safe-scope-method-invocation).

> For an operator that yields a value, such as `e1 + e2` or `c ? e1 : e2`, the safe-scope of the result is the narrowest scope among the safe-scopes of the operands of the operator. As a consequence, for a unary operator that yields a value, such as `+e`, the safe-scope of the result is the safe-scope of the operand.

Reviewer: Is that the case for the conditional operator? I wouldn't expect the first operand to be relevant there, but I could be wrong.

Reviewer 3: it doesn't matter, but it doesn't hurt either. The first operand must be a `bool`. Its safe scope is calling-method.  I couldn't wordsmith language that read reasonably well. Perhaps a note on the conditional operator's first operand?

Reviewer 4: It is the safe-scope *of the result* so the first operand (`c`) is not relevant *per se* as the safe-scope is determined statically and not based on which alternative is selected at runtime. I wouldn't wordsmith this into the normative text, but a note could be added if desired.

Reviewer 3: I added a note, as this has come up multiple times.

#### §safe-scope-method-invocation Method and property invocation

A value resulting from a method invocation `e1.M(e2, ...)` has safe-scope of the smallest of the following scopes:

- calling-method.
- The safe-scope of all argument expressions (including the receiver).

> A property invocation (either `get` or `set`) it treated as a method invocation of the underlying method by the above rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A property invocation (either `get` or `set`) is treated as a method invocation of the underlying method by the above rules.
```

#### safe-scope-rules-stackalloc `stackalloc`

The result of a stackalloc expression has safe-scope of current-method. It is not safe-to-return from the method.

#### safe-scope-rules-constructor Constructor invocations

A `new` expression that invokes a constructor obeys the same rules as a method invocation that is considered to return the type being constructed.

> In addition the safe-scope is no wider than the smallest of the safe-scopes of all arguments and operands of all object initializer expressions, recursively, if any initializer is present.

Reviewer: Can we be more specific than "no wider", e.g. just "is the smallest of the safe-scopes [...]"?

> > *Note*: These rules rely on `Span<T>` not having a constructor of the following form:

Reviewer: This is an odd note, being Span-specific. What happens if someone creates a `MySpan<T>` type with a constructor like that?

Reviewer 3: We have to cross that bridge in C# 11. Before that, `MySpan<T>` can't have a `ref` field.

>
> ```csharp

> > public Span<T>(ret T p)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> public Span<T>(ref T p)
```
